Sw Syncing RFC (#102)
tari-project/tari: RFC/src/RFC-0140 Syncing and seeding.md

> # RFC-0140/Sync and Seeding

Reviewer: Following C4, This should be a one-word short name matching the filename with no spaces. 

```suggestion
# RFC-0140/SyncAndSeeding
```

> # RFC-0140/Sync and Seeding

Author: I think I address all thats required.

WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

## Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", 
"NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in 
[BCP 14](https://tools.ietf.org/html/bcp14) (covering RFC2119 and RFC8174) when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as 
shown here.

## Disclaimer

The purpose of this document and its content is for information purposes only and may be subject to change or update
without notice.

This document may include preliminary concepts that may or may not be in the process of being developed by the Tari
community. The release of this document is intended solely for review and discussion by the community regarding the
technological merits of the potential system outlined herein.

## Goals

This document describes the process of Syncing, seeding, pruning and cut-through.

## Related RFCs

* [RFC-0110: Base Nodes](RFC-0110_BaseNodes.md)

## Descriptions

> ### Syncing

Reviewer 2: Grin downloads
- all block headers on the most worked chain
- the full state as it was at the node/pruning horizon, including the full UTXO, range proof and kernel data, as well as all corresponding MMRs

> When a new node comes online, looses connection or encounters a fork that is longer than is longer than it can solve, it must enter syncing mode. This will allow it to recover its state to the newest up to date state. Sycning can be diveded into 2 [SynchronisationStrategy]s, complete sync and sync. Complete sync will involve that the node communicates with an archive node to get the complete history of every single block from genesis block. Sync will involve the node getting every block from its [puning horizon](pruninghorizon) to current head, as well as every block header from genesis block. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a new node comes online, loses connection or encounters a chain re-organisation that is longer than it can tolerate, it must enter syncing mode. This will allow it to recover its state to the newest up to date state. Syncing can be divided into 2 [SynchronisationStrategy]s, complete sync and sync. Complete sync will involve that the node communicates with an archive node to get the complete history of every single block from genesis block. Sync will involve the node getting every block from its [pruning horizon](pruninghorizon) to current head, as well as every block header from genesis block. 
```

#### Complete Sync

Complete sync is only available from archive nodes, as these will be the only nodes that will be able to supply the complet history required to sync every block with every transaction from genesis block up onto [current head](currenthead). 

> #### Syncing process

Reviewer 2: In Grin the fast sync involves 
- Download all block headers on the most worked chain
- Download the full state as it was at the node/pruning horizon, including the full UTXO, range proof and kernel data, as well as all corresponding MMRs. 
- Validate the full state [_**Note:** The entire pruned blockchain up to the node/pruning horizon is validated_]
- Download full blocks since the horizon to get to the chain head

I do not see this in our scheme and believe we should have something similar, or am I missing something?

Author: > * Validate the full state [_**Note:** The entire pruned blockchain up to the node/pruning horizon is validated_]

are saying we should validate each and every snapshot of the blockchain since genesis?

Currently we validate the snapshot of the UTXO has horizon, and then validate each tx as we move forward

Reviewer 2: I think we should validate the full state of the blockchain (which equals the pruned blockchain) up to the node horizon. Same as Grin. And then all blocks from there to the tip.

Author: see top comment?

The syncing process is done in the following steps:

1. Set its [SynchronisationState] to `Synchronising`.
2. Load a bootstrap list of peers from a configuration file, or a cached list.
3. For each peer in this list:
   1. Establish a connection with the peer.
   2. Request a peer list from that peer.
   3. Request information about the most recent chain state (total accumulated work, block height, etc.) from the peer.

> 4. Choose the longest chain based on pow. 

Reviewer: Can you elaborate somewhere on how this is done?

Reviewer: Yes,  I mean add a sentence or two to explain that process :)

> 5. Download all headers from genesis block up onto [current head](currenthead), an validate the headers as you receive them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Download all headers from genesis block up onto [current head](currenthead), and validate the headers as you receive them.
```

6. Download all blocks from  [pruning horizon](pruninghorizon) up onto [current head](currenthead), if the node is doing a complete sync, the pruninghorizon will just be infinite, which means you will download all blocks ever created.

> 7. Validate blocks as if they where just mined and then received, in order of ascending age. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Validate blocks as if they where just mined and then received, in chronological order. 
```

After this process the node will be in sync and able to process blocks and transaction normally. 

#### Keeping in sync

> The node should periodically test its peers with ping messages to ensure that they are alive. When a node sends a ping message, it should enclude the current total pow, hash of the [current head](currenthead) and genesis block hash of its own current longest chain in the ping message. The receiving node will replay with a pong message also including the total pow, [current head](currenthead) and genesis block hash of its longest chain. If the two chains dont match up, the node with the lowest pow has the responsiblity to ask the peer for syncing information. 

Reviewer: Do I read this correctly? 
> genesis block hash of its own current longest chain

If I have a fork at block > 0, I'll always pass the Genesis block hash (i.e. block 0)?

Reviewer: :+1:

> If the genesis block hash's dont match the node is removed from its peer list as this node is running a different block chain, we can remove it. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the genesis block hashes don't match, the node is removed from its peer list as this node is running a different block chain. 
```

This will be hanled by the node asking for each block from the [current head](currenthead) going backword untill a known block is found. If no block is found, the node will enter sync mode and resync. It cannot recover from its state as the fork is older than its [pruning horizon](pruninghorizon).

> #### Chain forks

Reviewer: I wonder if "Chain reorganisation" isn't a more appropriate term here

> #### Chain forks

Reviewer 2: I think the entire blockchain state should be kept in memory up to the node/pruning horizon. This is the pruned blockchain.

> #### Chain forks

Author: Remember the blockchain state is the UTXO. So which snapshot are you saying we should keep?

To counter this problem we use  [pruning horizon](pruninghorizon), this allows every [node](base node) to be a "light" [archival node](archivenode). This in effect means that the node will keep a full history for a short while. If the node encounters a fork it can easily rewind its state to apply the fork. If the fork is longer than the [pruning horizon](pruninghorizon), the node will enter a sync state where it will resync. 

### Pruning and cut-through

[Pruning and cut-through]: #Pruning-and-cut-through	"Remove already spent outputs from the [utxo]"

In MimbleWimble, the state can be completely verified using the current [UTXO](utxo) set, the set of excess signatures (contained in the transaction kernels) and the proof-of-work. The full block and transaction history is not required. This allows base layer nodes to remove old used inputs from the [blockchain] and or the [mempool]. [Cut-through](cut-through) happens in the [mempool] while pruning happens in the [blockchain] with already confirmed transactions. This will remove the inputs and outputs, but will retain the excesses  of each [transaction]. 

> Pruning is only for the benefit of the local base node as it reduces the local blockchain size. Pruning only happens afterthe [pruning horizon](pruninghorizon) height. A Base node will either run in archive mode or prune mode, if the base node is running in archive mode it should not prune. 

Reviewer: I interpret "after" to mean _newer_ here. Perhaps stick to "older/newer" vs "after/before" which is less ambiguous

WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

## Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", 
"NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in 
[BCP 14](https://tools.ietf.org/html/bcp14) (covering RFC2119 and RFC8174) when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as 
shown here.

## Disclaimer

The purpose of this document and its content is for information purposes only and may be subject to change or update
without notice.

This document may include preliminary concepts that may or may not be in the process of being developed by the Tari
community. The release of this document is intended solely for review and discussion by the community regarding the
technological merits of the potential system outlined herein.

## Goals

This document describes the process of Syncing, seeding, pruning and cut-through.

## Related RFCs

* [RFC-0110: Base Nodes](RFC-0110_BaseNodes.md)

## Descriptions

### Syncing

> When a new node comes online, loses connection or encounters a chain re-organisation that is longer than it can tolerate, it must enter syncing mode. This will allow it to recover its state to the newest up to date state. Syncing can be divided into 2 [SynchronisationStrategy]s, complete sync and sync. Complete sync will involve that the node communicates with an archive node to get the complete history of every single block from genesis block. Sync will involve the node getting every block from its [pruning horizon](pruninghorizon) to [current head](current head), as well as every block header from genesis block. 

Reviewer 3: A grammar nit: "Complete sync will `mean` that..." 
Involve can be used in this sentence but will require more reorg to make it fit.

Reviewer 3: Did you guys decide to just use the term `sync` for the faster sync strategy? It feels like it should have a qualifier like `fast sync` because just using the word sync is very generic.

Author: I explicitly decided to not use fast sync, as I want to reserve this for future use. A good example of a faster sync is to begin a node with horizon 1, and as you receive blocks you increase that to a more reasonable number.

#### Complete Sync

Complete sync is only available from archive nodes, as these will be the only nodes that will be able to supply the complete history required to sync every block with every transaction from genesis block up onto [current head](currenthead). 

#### Syncing process

The syncing process MUST be done in the following steps:

> 1. Set its [SynchronisationState] to `Synchronising`.

Reviewer 3: remove `its`

2. Load a bootstrap list of peers from a configuration file, or a cached list.
3. For each peer in this list:
   1. Establish a connection with the peer.
   2. Request a peer list from that peer.
   3. Request information about the most recent chain state (total accumulated work, block height, etc.) from the peer.

> 4. Choose the longest chain based on POW. 

Reviewer 3: POW = PoW? Just check what is we are using elsewhere in the docs for consistency but usually in an acronym like this conjunctions and propositions (i.e. of) would be lowercase.

Author: This was asked by one of the other reviews, but I think PoW is better.

5. Download all headers from genesis block up onto [current head](currenthead), and validate the headers as you receive them.
6. Download [UTXO](utxo) set at [pruning horizon](pruninghorizon). 

> 7. Download all blocks from  [pruning horizon](pruninghorizon) up onto [current head](currenthead), if the node is doing a complete sync, the [pruning horizon](pruninghorizon) will just be infinite, which means you will download all blocks ever created.

Reviewer 3: onto = to

8. Validate blocks as if they where just mined and then received, in chronological order. 

After this process the node will be in sync and able to process blocks and transaction normally. 

#### Keeping in sync

> The node SHOULD periodically test its peers with ping messages to ensure that they are alive. When a node sends a ping message, it should include the current total POW, hash of the [current head](currenthead) and genesis block hash of its own current longest chain in the ping message. The receiving node MUST relay with a pong message also including the total POW, [current head](currenthead) and genesis block hash of its longest chain. If the two chains dont match up, the node with the lowest POW has the responsiblity to ask the peer for syncing information. 

Reviewer 3: grammar: "The receiving node MUST `reply` with a pong message including their own total PoW..."

If the genesis block hashes don't match, the node is removed from its peer list as this node is running a different blockchain. 

This will be handled by the node asking for each block from the [current head](currenthead) going backward for older blocks until a known block is found. If no block is found, the node will enter sync mode and resync. It cannot recover from its state as the fork is older than its [pruning horizon](pruninghorizon).

#### Chain forks

> Chain forks can be a problem since in mimblewimble not all nodes keep the complete history, the design philosophy  is more in the lines of only keeping the current [UTXO](utxo). Only keeping the current [UTXO](utxo) will not be possible, because if you encounter a fork where there are two running version on the blockchain, you will not be able to swop without doing sync again. 

Reviewer 3: capitalize Mimblewimble I think.

Reviewer 3: Double space after design philosophy

Reviewer 3: Grammar: "...the design philosophy is more `along` the lines of..."

Reviewer 3: replace all mentions of the UTXO with UTXO set?

Author: I changed this to blockchain state. This has already caused some confusion and I see that it could cause more comfusion.

To counter this problem we use  [pruning horizon](pruninghorizon), this allows every [node](base node) to be a "light" [archival node](archivenode). This in effect means that the node will keep a full history for a short while. If the node encounters a fork it can easily rewind its state to apply the fork. If the fork is longer than the [pruning horizon](pruninghorizon), the node will enter a sync state where it will resync. 

### Pruning and cut-through

[Pruning and cut-through]: #Pruning-and-cut-through	"Remove already spent outputs from the [utxo]"

> In MimbleWimble, the state can be completely verified using the current [UTXO](utxo) set, the set of excess signatures (contained in the transaction kernels) and the proof-of-work. The full block and transaction history is not required. This allows base layer nodes to remove old used inputs from the [blockchain] and or the [mempool]. [Cut-through](cut-through) happens in the [mempool] while pruning happens in the [blockchain] with already confirmed transactions. This will remove the inputs and outputs, but will retain the excesses  of each [transaction]. 

Reviewer 3: perhaps add in the last sentence that it will remove the inputs/outputs that have been spent.

This document describes the process of Syncing, seeding, pruning and cut-through.

## Related RFCs

* [RFC-0110: Base Nodes](RFC-0110_BaseNodes.md)

## Descriptions

### Syncing

When a new node comes online, loses connection or encounters a chain re-organisation that is longer than it can tolerate, it must enter syncing mode. This will allow it to recover its state to the newest up to date state. Syncing can be divided into 2 [SynchronisationStrategy]s, complete sync and sync. Complete sync will mean that the node communicates with an archive node to get the complete history of every single block from genesis block. Sync will involve the node getting every block from its [pruning horizon](pruninghorizon) to [current head](current head), as well as every block header from genesis block. 

#### Complete Sync

Complete sync is only available from archive nodes, as these will be the only nodes that will be able to supply the complete history required to sync every block with every transaction from genesis block up onto [current head](currenthead). 

#### Syncing process

The syncing process MUST be done in the following steps:

1. Set [SynchronisationState] to `Synchronising`.

> 2. Load a bootstrap list of peers from a configuration file, or a cached list.

Author: I think I agree

3. For each peer in this list:
   1. Establish a connection with the peer.
   2. Request a peer list from that peer.
   3. Request information about the most recent chain state (total accumulated work, block height, etc.) from the peer.
4. Choose the longest chain based on PoW. 

> 5. Download all headers from genesis block up onto [current head](currenthead), and validate the headers as you receive them.

Author: We probably need to define a handshake message somewhere. 
In this I think we add a flag for do we allow syncing data. And the node downloads the data from a node he selects. I dont think we need to overcomplicate things here by trying to do a parrallel sync where each node supplies a different block

> 5. Download all headers from genesis block up onto [current head](currenthead), and validate the headers as you receive them.

Reviewer: Ok, punt this to another RFC. I think if a node is obligated to upload all the data to a syncing peer, this leads to a very easy DoS attack.

> 5. Download all headers from genesis block up onto [current head](currenthead), and validate the headers as you receive them.

Author: Nodes should not be obligated to upload data. But I think game theory will make that they do.

6. Download [UTXO](utxo) set at [pruning horizon](pruninghorizon). 

> 7. Download all blocks from  [pruning horizon](pruninghorizon) up to [current head](currenthead), if the node is doing a complete sync, the [pruning horizon](pruninghorizon) will just be infinite, which means you will download all blocks ever created.

Author: see above message: tldr I dont think so
We just need to ensure that not everybody asks the same node

8. Validate blocks as if they where just mined and then received, in chronological order. 

After this process the node will be in sync and able to process blocks and transaction normally. 

#### Keeping in sync

> The node SHOULD periodically test its peers with ping messages to ensure that they are alive. When a node sends a ping message, it should include the current total PoW, hash of the [current head](currenthead) and genesis block hash of its own current longest chain in the ping message. The receiving node MUST reply with a pong message also including the total PoW, [current head](currenthead) and genesis block hash of its longest chain. If the two chains dont match up, the node with the lowest PoW has the responsiblity to ask the peer for syncing information. 

Author: sending a ping message is optional, replying with a pong is a must. There is now way of forcing a ping send, except if we double the about of ping and pong messages in the network. If one of the two nodes send one, its fine. 

-----

it should set to sync, will update rfc for this

If the genesis block hashes don't match, the node is removed from its peer list as this node is running a different blockchain. 

> This will be handled by the node asking for each block from the [current head](currenthead) going backward for older blocks until a known block is found. If no block is found, the node will enter sync mode and resync. It cannot recover from its state as the fork is older than its [pruning horizon](pruninghorizon).

Author: Its going to the headers, yes. But it might need the blocks as well.

#### Chain forks

> Chain forks can be a problem since in MimbleWimble not all nodes keep the complete history, the design philosophy is more along the lines of only keeping the current [Blockchain state](blockchainstate). Only keeping the current [Blockchain state](blockchainstate) will not be possible, because if you encounter a fork where there are two running version on the blockchain, you will not be able to swop without doing sync again. 

Reviewer: I'm struggling to work out what this paragraph is about
```suggestion
Chain forks can be a problem since in MimbleWimble not all nodes keep the complete transaction history, only the current [Blockchain state](blockchainstate).However, if such a node only maintains the current [Blockchain state](blockchainstate) (pruned mode) it is not possible for the node to  "rewind" its state to handle forks in the chain history. In this case, a pruned mode must re-sync its chain to recover the necessary transaction history. 
```

To counter this problem we use  [pruning horizon](pruninghorizon), this allows every [node](base node) to be a "light" [archival node](archivenode). This in effect means that the node will keep a full history for a short while. If the node encounters a fork it can easily rewind its state to apply the fork. If the fork is longer than the [pruning horizon](pruninghorizon), the node will enter a sync state where it will resync. 

### Pruning and cut-through

[Pruning and cut-through]: #Pruning-and-cut-through	"Remove already spent outputs from the [utxo]"

> In MimbleWimble, the state can be completely verified using the current [UTXO](utxo) set, the set of excess signatures (contained in the transaction kernels) and the proof-of-work. The full block and transaction history is not required. This allows base layer nodes to remove old used inputs from the [blockchain] and or the [mempool]. [Cut-through](cut-through) happens in the [mempool] while pruning happens in the [blockchain] with already confirmed transactions. This will remove the spent inputs and outputs, but will retain the excesses of each [transaction]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In MimbleWimble, the state can be completely verified using the current [UTXO](utxo) set (which contains the spending commitments and range proofs), the set of excess signatures (contained in the transaction kernels) and the proof-of-work. The full block and transaction history is not required. This allows base layer nodes to remove old used inputs from the [blockchain] and or the [mempool]. [Cut-through](cut-through) happens in the [mempool] while pruning happens in the [blockchain] with already confirmed transactions. This will remove the spent inputs and outputs, but will retain the excesses of each [transaction]. 
```

> Pruning is only for the benefit of the local base node as it reduces the local blockchain size. Pruning only happens after the block is older than the [pruning horizon](pruninghorizon) height. A Base node will either run in archive mode or prune mode, if the base node is running in archive mode it should not prune. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pruning is only for the benefit of the local base node as it reduces the local blockchain size. Pruning only happens after the block is older than the [pruning horizon](pruninghorizon) height. A Base node will either run in archive mode or prune mode, if the base node is running in archive mode it MUST NOT prune. 
```

### Syncing

When a new node comes online, loses connection or encounters a chain re-organisation that is longer than it can tolerate, it must enter syncing mode. This will allow it to recover its state to the newest up to date state. Syncing can be divided into 2 [SynchronisationStrategy]s, complete sync and sync. Complete sync will involve that the node communicates with an archive node to get the complete history of every single block from genesis block. Sync will involve the node getting every block from its [pruning horizon](pruninghorizon) to current head, as well as every block header from genesis block. 

> #### Complete Sync

Reviewer 2: Some typos:

- supply the "**complet**" history required to sync
- Choose the longest "**chain**" based on pow
- the "**pruninghorizon**" will just be infinite
- Validate blocks as if they "**where**" just mined and then received
- it should "**enclude**" the current total pow
- If the two chains "**dont**" match up
- pow has the "**responsiblity**" to ask 
- This will be "**hanled**" by the node 
- going "**backword untill**" a known block is found
- Only "**keepinng**" the current 
- MimbleWimble and mimblewimble vs. Mimblewimble
- only happens "**afterthe**" pruning horizon
- remove all spent outputs "**thats**" older than 
- in "**it's**" current stored [_Note: must be **its**_]

> #### Complete Sync

Reviewer 2: Please capitalize all abbreviations consistently, example UTXO, POW, etc. This will enhance the reading ability of the RFC, at least for me :-).
